---
title: "High Hopes, Low Expectations"
date: 2024-12-02T15:25:33-05:00
draft: false
tags: []
---

Although I [have written about this idea before](posts/embrace-imperfection), I
feel like it's one worth elaborating on. We live in an age of instant
gratification, which I think leaves us often feeling underwhelmed. In most
cases, this disappointment is due to our expectations being too high.

There is, of course, a simple solution to this problem: lower your expectations.
On the surface you might think "but why should I lower my standards?", and I'll
try to make the case for why you should.

When your expectations are low, everything is a pleasant surprise. You're easily
amused, and you're grateful for the little things. When you expect the worst,
you're rarely disappointed. When you expect the best, you're often let down.

Expecting less might seem like settling for mediocrity, but I don't think that's
the case. It's more about being realistic and accepting that everything in our
material world is imperfect, so much so that expecting perfection is a path to
endless disappointment and frustration.

It's a lot easier to be content with what you have than to strive for something
that is either unattainable or unsustainable. This is not to say that you should
never strive for greatness, but rather that you should be content with what you
have while you work towards your goals. And it's okay to have modest goals, too.

To what degree it's the result of the Instagram/TikTok era we live in, I'm not
sure, but I do think that we're all a little too obsessed with perfection. We're
constantly bombarded with images of people living their best lives, and it's
easy to feel like we're missing out. What people post on the Internet is
generally the highlight reel of their lives, not the behind-the-scenes footage.

Mediocrity is also kind of great when you think about it. Think of it as the
middle ground between the unobtainable (perfection) and the undesirable
(failure). It's the sweet spot where you can be content with what you have while
still striving for something better, if you want.

In a hypercapitalist world, most of the messaging we receive through the various
media outlets pushes us toward consumption and dissatisfaction. We're encouraged
to run the hedonic treadmill like a hungry bear is chasing us and the only way
to escape is to buy more stuff and take more vacations (be sure to post the best
photos, of course). To me this sounds exhausting: I just want to enjoy my life,
spend time with my friends and family, and do work that I find meaningful.

It's not about the stuff I own or the places I've been, but the relationships
I've built and the memories I've made. It's also about living in peace and being
grateful for what I have. Learning to love yourself the way you are,
imperfections and all, is a big part of that. That's not to say you shouldn't
work to better yourself, but it's really hard to be happy if you're constantly
comparing yourself to others and feeling like you're not good enough.

Since I adopted the "high hopes, low expectations" mantra I've found that I'm a
lot less outcome dependent. It's much easier to practice detachment when you're
not overly invested in the outcome. It's not about being disengaged, but rather
about being realistic and accepting that most things in life are out of your
control.

We have very little agency in life, and there are very few things that are
completely within our own personal sphere of influence. The things we can
control are how we react to the daily events, how we treat others, and how we
treat ourselves. Everything else is largely out of our hands. You can't control
what other people do or how they behave, but you can control how you react to
it. You can't control the weather, but you can control how you dress for it. You
can't control the economy, but you can control how you spend your money.

I may be beating a dead horse at this point, but I think it's a message worth
pondering. So perhaps the next time you go to a restaurant, don't expect the
best meal of your life. Instead, expect a decent meal and be pleasantly
surprised if it's great. If you go into a movie with low expectations, you might
find that you enjoy it more than you thought you would. If you go on a date with
low expectations, you might find that you have a great time.
