---
title: Believe It or Not, Reality Is Real Life
date: 2024-04-15T14:10:15-04:00
draft: false
tags:
  - reality
  - life
  - social media
  - hiring
  - jobs
  - LinkedIn
---

In the olden days, we had résumés, and today, well, some of us still have
résumés (or curriculum vitaes, if you prefer). But now, we _also_ have social
media profiles, which–to some folks–are the new résumés. They are the new first
impression for the chronically online, the new first point of contact, the new
first everything. And in the context of getting a job, these profiles and our
Internet behavioural breadcrumbs are the new first thing that can get you hired
or not hired. Let's hope those recruiters don't find your Reddit profile.

But here's the thing: your LinkedIn profile is not reality. Neither are résumés
for that matter, as in both cases, these can be curated to present a particular
image of yourself that goes beyond reality into the realm of fantasy–if you
choose. They're a blank canvas fact-checked by no one, and you can paint
whatever you wish upon them. Just be sure to pray to your deity of choice that
no one asks you to prove your proficiency in that one thing you said you were an
expert in and that your reference checks pan out.

I have, over the years, encountered many of the sort of people who are certified
Thought Leaders on the Internet (i.e., have lots of followers on _\<platform>_),
and yet, in real life, they struggle to do much other than spend all day
scrolling through their feeds. They are not the experts they claim to be, or
perhaps they suffer from crippling anxiety or ADHD, and based on their actual
output (i.e., in a professional context), it becomes clear their online presence
is a facade.

In my attempts to acquire a job with health insurance since deleting my
LinkedIn profile, I have encountered a few perplexed folks who can't seem to
grok my disinterest in receiving irrelevant recruiter spam, collecting fake
Internet friends, and seeing what the [LinkedIn
Lunatics](https://old.reddit.com/r/LinkedInLunatics/) are posting about today.

From what I recall, I had acquired quite many LinkedIn buddies over the years,
but I can't say I remember many of them. I have easily kept in touch with anyone
worth keeping in touch with, and I haven't required anything other than email
and a phone number to do so as an average human existing in reality.

## But don't delete your LinkedIn account

Sadly, I do think most people should keep their LinkedIn profiles, as we live in
a time when being the odd one out will not help you in finding employment should
you need to. Lucky for me, I can exist without a day job, so I can afford to be
the odd one out and forgo the unwanted spam. But most people can't, and I get
that.

I do find it odd, however, that we have come to a point where we are judged by
whether we choose to be members of a particular advertisement delivery system,
and I personally loathe ads in all forms.

But I digress. The point is, your LinkedIn profile is not reality. It is a
fiction of your own making, and it is a fiction that can be used to your
advantage. But it is not reality. Reality is real life, and real life is not a
series of posts on a social media platform. Real life is the things you do when
you are not posting on social media. It is the things you do when you are not
trying to impress people you don't know. Real life is what you do in between
your vacations. It's the things you do when you are not trying to get hired.
Whether it's LinkedIn, your Hinge profile, your wonderful vacation photos on
Instagram, or your Twitter feed, these are not reality. They are your personal
projection of whatever you want you to be.

I won't get into value judgments about whether you should or shouldn't have
accounts on these platforms (I choose not to). There are some
exceptions, of course. For example, I'm still a big fan of GitHub, and some
people might consider it a social media platform.

## To be or not to be

We humans are social creatures; we want to fit in, be liked, and do as the group
does. For me, however, I prefer 100% organic real life experiences and abhor
what the modern-day ad-infested Internet has become. Thus, I choose to use my
time to take walks in the park, listen to music, read books (ok, ok, I mostly do
audiobooks these days), work on my various projects, and write. I occasionally
follow the news cycle and still do read-only Reddit ([_old_
Reddit](https://old.reddit.com/), that is), but I avoid allowing myself to get
sucked into the negativity vortex.

Do you _need_ a profile on _\<platform>_? No, not really. Will it be easier to
find a job if you exist on LinkedIn? Yes, probably. Will your Hinge matches be
more trusting of you if they can stalk your Instagram vacation photos before
agreeing to a date? Probably. But is it necessary? No, not really.

So to those on the fence, worried about missing out, or feeling like they need a
break from the scrolling addiction, I say do go and delete that account. You'll
be fine. You'll be better off. You'll be happier. You'll be more productive.
You'll be more _you_.
