---
title: "Speak Last"
date: 2024-09-21T15:13:00-04:00
draft: false
tags: 
- personal growth
- listening
- empathy
- ego
- communication
---

When it comes to personal growth, if that's something you care about, it's worth
thinking about your blind spots, your biases, and anything else that might be
holding you back. I tend to have a lot of conversations with strangers, and
lately I've been making more of any effort to listen rather than speak. It's
quite a simple yet powerful way to learn about others, and yourself too, in the
process. People will reveal a surprising amount if you simply give them space
and keep your mouth shut. A few questions here and there to move things along
helps, but the questions matter less than giving others time to speak (and
you'll find that people will often fill the gaps themselves).

Practicing listening is probably more important than practicing speaking, at
least when it comes to conversational skills and learning to connect with
others. Listening is not entirely passive, it still requires a back and forth,
particularly to demonstrate to the other party that you're actually listening.
Asking follow-up questions is a good way to demonstrate your engagement and
interest, and it gives you an opportunity to get clarification and a deeper
understanding. This is often referred to as active listening, and it's a skill
like any other which requires practice.

We're all egotistical, although some of us pretend not to be. We all feel like
the main characters in our own lives (which, arguably, we _are_), and everyone
loves talking about themselves when the opportunity arises. It's okay to have an
ego, it's quite natural and not something you can easily get rid of. But you can
always become more aware of the ego, how it affects your behaviour, and how to
keep it in check.

Listening forces us to put our ego aside, at least temporarily, and to focus on
someone else. Listening requires humility and patience. A good listener is
empathetic, understanding, and non-judgmental. A good listener will ask
questions to clarify without making the other person feel stupid or judged, and
will show genuine interest in peoples' stories, experiences, and feelings.

People tend to throw the word "empathy" around a lot, so I'll try not to lean
too hard into it, but we can't discuss listening without talking about empathy.
Empathy helps us connect to others, and we can only empathize by listening and
allowing others to express their thoughts and feelings so we can understand
them.

It's also important as a listener to be aware of your own biases and to try to
avoid the urge to berate, interrupt, steer, or correct the speaker. It's not
about you, it's about them. As a listener, you should be a mirror, reflecting
back what you hear, and not a window, projecting your own thoughts and feelings
onto the speaker.

Everyone has their struggles, their stories, their experiences, and their unique
perspectives. You can learn an awful lot more by listening than speaking, and
people will probably like you more too.

To be clear, I don't consider myself a good listener, this is something I
continue to work on. I have a tendency to interrupt (bad), offer unsolicited
advice (bad), and sometimes I'm not really interested in what the other person
is saying (bad). In that way, I suppose this blog post is as much for me as it
is for the reader. Something to medidate on, perhaps.
