---
title: "Bad Incentives, Bad Outcomes"
date: 2023-08-15T14:09:38-04:00
draft: false
tags:
- incentives
- economics
- housing
---

When it comes to humans, you can usually answer the "why?" question about
behavioural observations by examining the incentives. This is especially true
in economics, but also true of nearly everything in life, such as why
politicians ignore their constituents or adopt unpopular policies. There's a
popular catchphrase to describe this kind of analysis: ["follow the
money"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Follow_the_money).

Few people bother to do incentive analysis, and they find themselves perplexed
as to why someone else's actions don't match _their_ expectations. In most
cases, it's obvious why someone would do a thing once you've considered the
incentives. Most of the problems today with late-stage capitalism can be traced
back to poorly designed incentives.

There's nothing natural about capitalism–it's a strictly human invention–and
thus we need to design sensible incentives for the thing to work in such a way
that we don't cannibalize ourselves like we're starving to death.

## The so-called "housing shortage"

One subject that seems to come up continuously in "the news" these days is the
problem of housing affordability. One does not have to dig deep to understand
why the housing market is such a failure, and you find this problem prevalent
across most of the Western world. The answer to why housing is unaffordable is
very simple: the incentives are wrong.

If you poke around subreddits like
[r/REBubble](https://old.reddit.com/r/REBubble/), or read the comments on
Hacker News about why housing is expensive, you will commonly see most people
blame the same tired scapegoats:

- Zoning laws bad
- Airbnb bad
- NIMBYs bad
- Regulation bad
- Build more homes

These likely all contribute to the problem to some degree, but fundamentally
none are the sole or root cause. If anything, all these problems combined
contribute a negligible amount to the overall situation of housing
unaffordability. If you simply banned all these things, housing would continue
to be as unaffordable as ever.

## Is there a housing shortage?

Let's look at whether there's actually any shortage of homes. To make my
argument, we'll look at data from the US, but the problem is the same
everywhere you go.

Looking at recent [vacancy data from the US
census](https://www.census.gov/housing/hvs/files/currenthvspress.pdf), we can
see there are around 15 million vacant homes in the US:

![Vacant Homes](vacant-hoooms.png)

You are free to split hairs on the definitions of "vacant", but 15 million is
such an enormous number that I will confidently reject the argument that there
aren't enough homes. If anything, we have too many homes, given how many are
vacant.

I see this first hand in New York City: if you walk around at night and look at
the big, shiny, luxury condo buildings, you'll see that the vast majority of
the apartments in those buildings are dark, which implies nobody's home. It's
too much of a coincidence that so many of these apartments are mostly dark at
night to assume the explanation is anything other than a low real occupancy
rate.

It's not just luxury condos, but in NYC there's a problem with rent-stabilized
vacant residential units, where [landlords are unwilling to rent
them](https://www.curbed.com/2023/07/landlords-bluffing-vacant-apartments-warehousing-nyc.html).

This issue of vacant apartments in a city like NYC could be fixed in an instant
with a vacancy tax in addition to a non-primary residence tax. Ideally, the
taxes would be high enough to incentivize not hoarding homes such that it
forces all that held-back inventory onto the market at market rates.

Granted, I think you can reasonably make an argument that _some_ percentage of
these vacant homes are reasonably vacant: for example, they might be vacant
because they're being repaired or refurbished, but 15 million is about 10% of
the total housing stock, which intuitively seems like an enormously large
percentage of vacant homes, and this flies in the face of there being a
supposed housing shortage.

## Why are homes so expensive then?

So if we reject the idea that there's a shortage of housing, why is housing so
expensive? The answer, of course, is quite simple: we built a system of
incentives that treats housing not so much as _housing_, but rather as a
subsidized and highly-leveraged investment scheme. A _huge_ portion of those
people holding on to housing inventory do so because they believe they can sell
their homes for more at some point in the future.

Leverage drives up the cost of housing, especially when interest rates are
artificially low (even the current Fed fund rate of 5.25-5.5% is well below
historical levels, which are in the 7-8% range). And in the US in particular,
underwriting 30-year fixed-rate mortgages is essentially free money for banks,
because the US government guarantees such mortgages so that the banks always
make money. The banks have no incentive to do proper risk management (["moral
hazard"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moral_hazard)).

## How to fix it?

The most obvious answer is to fix the incentive system. Stop giving tax breaks
to the owning class, stop subsidizing home ownership with complicated financial
derivatives and instruments (i.e., the Federal Reserve should _never_ be
bailing out banks for underwriting bad loans, and the Fed should certainly
_not_ be buying mortgage-backed securities on the open market).

The market is broken because governments have tipped the scales to help the
owning class, while simultaneously leaving behind everyone who will never be
wealthy enough to acquire their property, leaving the non-owning class in a
perpetual state of poverty as real wages continue to decline.

The system as it is doesn't reward people for doing good work, hard work, or
contributing value to society. It simply rewards whoever got there first, or
timed their purchase right.

In other words: let's stop treating housing as a Ponzi or get-rich-quick
scheme, and instead treat housing as what it is: housing.

...but more realistically, we'll likely have _business as usual_ for the foreseeable future, and I suspect it gets worse before it gets better.
