---
title: "Precious Brain Resources"
date: 2022-10-08T13:09:38-05:00
draft: false
tags:
- brain
- resources
- creativity
- learning
---
We're told early on in life that memorization is the path to success. Education
systems seem to be largely based on this idea. Most school lessons involve some
degree of memorization, and creativity is generally discouraged in core
curriculums.

I'm pretty sure this is a bad idea, because there's not really that much benefit
to memorization. Instead, I think critical thinking and the ability to quickly
find information is much more valuable.

Take, for example, the humble pocket calculator. When I was growing up, we were
in the early era of the internet, and computers (and calculators) were still
considered a bit of an oddity in many ways.

![Calculator](calculator.jpg "A nifty Casio calculator")

Some people considered using a calculator cheating in math class, because when
they grew up they didn't have calculators and they had to use a slide rule or an
abacus. Their argument, as I understood it, was that you wouldn't learn how to
do math properly if you just punched the numbers into the calculator.

I would say that argument hasn't aged well, because hardly anyone does math by
pen and paper in the "real world" and somehow society hasn't collapsed as a
result. Amusingly, this battle still plays out in schools today, though it's
evolved a great deal. Some schools go as far as to give children laptops in
class for their schoolwork, because pencil and paper has mostly been replaced by
text editors.

I think, for the most part, this is sensible. I don't think we should stop
teaching children how to write with a pen or pencil on a sheet of paper, but for
the most part that's a skill which has remarkably little value today outside of
filling out forms at the DMV or the post office.

## The brain is not infinite

I like to think about the brain this way: we have an incredible amount of
capacity, but we're inherently constrained by the number of neurons, and we can
only store so much information within a given volume of brain mass. Thus,
there's a lot of trivia that we don't really need to memorize or retain.

In the context of programming, examples of things not worth retaining are esoteric APIs, programming language syntax, detailed specifications, and so on. The reason these aren't worth retaining is that they're incredibly easy to reference as needed. We can kind of treat the internet like a collective consciousness with memory that (usually) persists accurately through time.

It's true that the internet rots over time, but thankfully we have Wikipedia and
Stackoverflow, which have both managed to keep their content without requiring a
paywall. One reason for the demise of most "news" outlets is their inability to
find a way to monetize eyeballs for ephemeral information. Most "news" is a read
once type of content that rarely ages well.

## Retaining what matters

Books are a great media for information. I read a lot of books (though, to be
fair, I mostly consume books via audio these days, because it's more convenient)
and in particular I like reading older books, and I'm always surprised by how
_little_ the world seems to have changed based on how people describe the world
of today versus yesterday.

The _problem_ with books is they are time consuming and not really searchable
like the internet.

![Full glass of water](glass.jpg)

If we think about our brains as having finite capacity, we should utilize that
capacity in the most effective way possible. Memorizing random facts, details,
trivia, is not really that useful, provided the things we're memorizing are
easily recalled using modern technology. You don't need to know every single
detail of the syntax of the programming language you use every day so long as
you know the 80th percentile of the important stuff, and for everything else you
can have a tab open in your browser to the reference documentation for the
relevant subject.

I suspect if we spend too much time worrying about how much trivia we collect in
our brains and not enough time practicing our critical thinking and information
assessment skills we risk becoming the calculator without the ability to have
original thoughts or create new ideas.

I should mention that's not really based on any evidence or anything, just a
musing from my experiences. To put it another way: the most creative and
productive people I've known weren't creative and productive because they
memorized all the facts and figures of whatever their area of expertise was. To
the contrarary, they tend to be people who actually _don't know that much_
because having too much information can make it harder to have new ideas as you
get stuck thinking that there's nothing but what you already know.
