---
title: "Good Friends, Not Therapists"
date: 2022-09-02T10:46:56-05:00
draft: false
tags:
- therapy
- depression
- stoicism
- kafka
- camus
- philosophy
---

One of my many unpopular opinions is that therapy is mostly a waste of money. To
be clear, I'm referring to the kind of therapy where you pay someone for 45
minutes to an hour of their time to sit there, listen to your problems, and
perhaps give you some kind of feedback or suggestions (or maybe they'll just
give you [CBT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_behavioral_therapy) book
recommendations after they've extracted enough revenue from you).

I've noticed on the Internet that therapy has become the magic cure to
everyone's problems. As if, paying a therapist to listen to you is going to
somehow change the world around you and make your employer give you a raise or
lower the cost of living or whatever it might be.

Now, I'm not saying therapy is _bad_ per se, and for some people it might even
be necessary, but I suspect the problem most people suffer from is merely a lack
of community, sense of purpose, and a whole lot of loneliness. What most people
probably need is good friends, the kind of friends who will listen to your
complaining, nod in agreement, sympathize with your problems, and have real
empathy.

Therapists are pretty much just good friends you can rent. They're (supposed to
be) non-judgemental, and if they have good advice based on life experiences or
whatever, then they'll offer it. They also give you that "tough love" or reality
checks that people sometimes need. However, good friends do that too.

Additionally, there's a lot of pseudoscientific psychology BS floating around,
most of which is perpetuated by people trying to sell stuff. The pharmaceutical
industry is absolutely ripe with scams and ineffective remedies that get pushed
onto patients in order to extract rents. SSRIs, for example, and the ["chemical
imbalance" theory of
depression](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2022/aug/03/the-chemical-imbalance-theory-of-depression-is-dead-but-that-doesnt-mean-antidepressants-dont-work)
have been largely debunked (not to say SSRIs don't work, but rather they won't
cure you).

I also have suggested many times that people try reading books before spending
money on therapy. Or, if your health coverage allows it, spend the money so long
as it's coming out of someone else's pocket. Most health plans don't cover
therapy because it probably won't save the insurance company any money.

CBT is actually a super useful tool, and you should definitely learn it. You
don't need to pay anyone for that, just do some Internet searching and you can
teach yourself CBT for no cost.

You can also learn a great deal from some guys who existed thousands of years
ago, notably the stoic philosophers like Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus. Most of
their writings are not protected by copyright law either, so you can find their
stuff on [Project Gutenberg](https://www.gutenberg.org/) without having to give
more money to Jeffrey Bezos. Once you start learning about the stoics, it might
lead you down the path toward Kafka and Camus as well.

In any case, you will get more value out of good friends who are able to cut the
BS than the most expensive therapist in the world.
