---
title: "Everyone Is Beautiful"
date: 2024-11-08T14:06:32-05:00
draft: false
tags:
- amiugly
- beauty
- self-esteem
- beauty standards
- photography
- authenticity
---

There's a subreddit called r/amiugly (as in, "Am I Ugly?") where people post
pictures of themselves and ask the community to rate their appearance. It's a
place where people seek validation, to be told that they are beautiful, or at
least not ugly. It's a place where people seek reassurance, to be told that they
are not alone in their insecurities.

I've spent some time on this subreddit, and I've noticed a pattern. The people
you mostly see are generally not ugly. Mostly, they are normal and skew young,
presumably with low self-esteem. I find it fascinating because it's an
interesting window into the minds of people who are insecure about their
appearance but–in most cases–have nothing to worry about.

In general, I think people are too hard on themselves. We are our own worst
critics, and we tend to focus on our flaws rather than our strengths. We see
ourselves in the mirror every day and become fixated on the things we don't like
about ourselves. We compare ourselves to others and feel inadequate. We see the
flaws in ourselves, but we don't see the beauty.

We also have a tendency to compare ourselves to unrealistic standards of beauty,
such as those we see in magazines, movies, and on social media. These standards
are not only unrealistic but often don't reflect reality because the subjects
and images are highly modified, edited, airbrushed, with ideal lighting, makeup,
and so on. This type of photography is also generally inauthentic, as its
purpose is often to sell a product or an image rather than to capture the
essence and character of the person.

Authenticity is beautiful because it's real, and when expressed, it's an
indicator of self-confidence and self-acceptance. To display your flaws
demonstrates you accept yourself and are comfortable in your own skin. It's a
sign of strength, not weakness.

I do believe that most everyone is beautiful. In fact, I personally find the
typical photography you see in advertisements or Instagram to be generally
off-putting. I prefer candid, unposed, unedited, gritty photos of real people in
real life.

A good photographer with a good eye and the right lens can make anyone look
great with the right light. And as a corollary, bad photography can make
beautiful people look terrible with the wrong light.

If you read the comments on the subreddit, you'll find that most of them are
generally positive. I think on average, most people are kind and supportive, but
we tend to focus on the negative comments, particularly the trolls and haters.
Sometimes we dismiss the positive comments as insincere or biased, even when
they're genuine.

Additionally, beauty is in the eye of the beholder: it's largely subjective, and
outward appearances are only one aspect of beauty. I have met plenty of people
who look great in photos, but as soon as they open their mouths, they reveal
their inner ugliness. Focusing on superficial beauty is shallow and likely to
leave you feeling unfulfilled.

I have photographed many people over the years, and I've found that everyone has
their best angles, their best expressions, and their best moments. And generally
speaking, with the right lens and lighting, everyone can look great.

Comparison is the thief of joy, so stop comparing yourself to others. In
particular, the people you see in ads or Instagram are not generally
representative of reality. While these modelesque people may indeed be
beautiful, you're seeing them at their best, likely with some editing, and they
too have their bad days, their own insecurities, and their own flaws.

If you're curious, you can browse the subreddit yourself at
<https://old.reddit.com/r/amiugly/>.
