---
title: "Make Art"
date: 2024-09-23T12:31:20-04:00
draft: false
tags:
- art
- creativity
- nature
- aesthetics
---

I think most people are artists, in one sense or another. We don't generally do
much to cultivate artists as a society, aside from the occasional optional art
class in school. I like to cosplay as an artist, but I don't think of myself as
particularly talented or skilled when it comes to making art.

When you look at the animal kingdom, art is one of the very few things that
separate humans from all the other animals. That's not to say that other animals
_don't_ create art, it's more that humans have a much more developed sense of
art. We can appreciate art in a way that other animals can't, but the other
animals certainly still appreciate art.

The most obvious example of animals showing an appreciation for art is (in my
opinion at least) how some species have evolved to display bright colors and
patterns. These colors and patterns are often used to attract mates, but they're
also used to scare off predators. It's a form of art that's evolved over
millions of years, and it's a form of art that's still evolving today. Sexual
dimorphism is a whole fascinating subject, albeit a bit off-topic, but it's an
interesting example of how nature uses art to increase the chances of survival
and the proliferation of the species.

What's more fascinating about how some animals use art for attracting mates
(such as bird songs, dances, and displays) is that much of this art also appeals
to humans, even though we're not the intended audience. We can appreciate the
beauty of a bird's song, even though the bird isn't singing for us. We can
appreciate the beauty of a peacock's tail, even though the peacock isn't showing
off for us. We can appreciate the beauty of a spider's web, even though the
spider isn't weaving for us. It suggests there's some natural connection between
animals and art that goes beyond mere survival.

Music is probably one of the most popular forms of art in terms of consumption,
though we probably don't always think of music as art in the same way we might
think of a painting or a sculpture. Music is used to convey emotions, opinions,
stories, and ideas. Music can transcend generations and cultures, and it can
bring people together in a way that few other things can. Music is a form of art
that's been around for as long as humans have been around, and it's a form of
art that will probably be around for as long as humans are around.

Few people are taught how to appreciate art, and even fewer people are taught
how to make art (excluding your elementary school art class). It's a real shame,
in my opinion, because making art is fun and rewarding. It's a great way to
express yourself, learn more about yourself, connect with others, and explore
new ideas.

Learning to appreciate art isn't hard, it's generally as simple as learning what
you enjoy and what you don't, and taking time to appreciate the things you do
enjoy. Good art is just whatever you like; ignore an critics or "experts". Some
people may want to gatekeep art, but art is for everyone.

We're all artists, but some of us may not have found our medium yet, or allowed
ourselves the opportunity to explore our interests. So get out there and make
some art if you're not already.
