---
title: "Mind-Body-Gut Connection"
date: 2024-10-03T16:33:26-04:00
draft: false
tags:
- mind-body connection
- brain-gut connection
- mind-body-gut connection
- somatics
- yoga
---

You've heard of the mind-body connection, and maybe also the brain-gut
connection, but have you heard of the mind-body-gut connection? I just made it
up for this blog post, but I think it's something interesting to noodle on.

I think the term "mind-body connection" has existed in the minds of health and
wellness folks for quite some time, but the gut-brain connection is a somewhat
newer concept. Only in the past few decades have we began to scratch the surface
of how the gut and brain communicate with each other.

The mind-body connection is the idea that our thoughts and emotions can affect
the biological and physiological processes in our body. The gut-brain connection
is the idea that the gut and brain communicate with each other through the vagus
nerve, hormones, and other pathways.

In the case of the mind-body connection, we know that we can use physical
activity to improve brain function. For example, exercise increases plasticity
in the brain, which allows our brain to create new neural pathways and
connections. This is why exercise is often recommended for people with
depression or anxiety. The connection goes both ways: we can induce changes in
our physical body through our thoughts and emotions, one example of which is how
placebos can have a real effect on our health if we believe they will.

The gut contains its own nervous system, called the enteric nervous system, and
plays host to trillions of bacteria that help us digest food, produce vitamins,
and regulate our immune system. The gut-brain connection is a two-way street:
the brain can affect the gut, and the gut can affect the brain. For example,
stress can cause changes in the gut microbiome, which can then affect our mood
and behavior. This is why some people experience digestive issues when they're
stressed or anxious.

Gut health (i.e., having the right balance of beneficial bacteria in your gut)
is critical for overall health, especially mental health. Some evidence suggests
a connection between gut health and conditions like depression, anxiety, and
even autism, though you should take this with a grain of salt because the
evidence is questionable at best.

In my personal experience, I find I feel best when I do a combination of eating
well, getting daily exercise, practicing mindfulness, and making sure I get a
good night's sleep. I also started taking a probiotic supplement a few years ago
that I found has helped with my digestion and overall well-being, but I don't
want to make any recommendations as the commercial probiotic industry is largely
unregulated and there's a lot of snake oil out there.

I love practicing yoga for a number of reasons, but one of the main reasons is
that it combines the physical and mental aspects of health. I find that when I
practice yoga regularly, I feel more connected to my body and generally less
anxious. Yoga is a somatic practice, which means it's about connecting the mind
and body through movement.

One description of yoga is that it's a way to control the mind through the body
(among other things). The idea is that if one can learn to focus on breathing,
movement, and holding poses, one can learn to be present and (as the ultimate
goal of yoga) be free of the suffering that comes from the mind's constant
chatter.

Yoga of course also has physical benefits, like increased flexibility, strength,
balance, and coordination. I imagine most people in the West who practice yoga
probably do it mainly for the physical benefits, and accidentally discover the
mind-body benefits along the way.

Some people believe we're fairly "advanced" when it comes to science, medicine,
and our understanding of the human brain and our physiology, but it seems like
we're still quite far off from understanding how it all works together. Somatics
takes the approach that you should lean in to your feelings and sensations, and
you can do this through physical movement or other practices like meditation or
breathwork.

Although I started practicing yoga around 15 years ago, I wish I'd gotten into
it much earlier in life. Habits with positive benefits compound over time, so
the sooner you begin and stick to it, the more powerful the benefits as you go.
Small improvements in your health and well-being can lead to big changes in your
life over time.
