---
title: "How to Be Human"
date: 2024-10-24T15:40:25-04:00
draft: false
tags:
- boredom
- mindfulness
- social media
- technology
- modern life
- observation
- photography
- human connection
---

Take a walk on any given day these days, and instead of staring at your phone,
try looking around. If you want to do this on hard mode, leave the phone at home
if you can manage. You may notice that many people are engrossed in whatever is
going on on their own devices, as opposed to existing in the reality around
them.

![Comparing Instagram followers](1.jpeg "Comparing Instagram followers")

I'm a simple person, and to me this is perplexing. Many people complain about
loneliness, difficulty making friends, troubles with dating, and yet they are so
absorbed in their own little metaverses that they don't even notice the people
around them.

![A wild pack of Instagrammers](2.jpeg "A wild pack of Instagrammers")

From my own observations, most of the time the people who are walking around
staring at their phones tend to be scrolling through Instagram (or equivalent)
mindlessly absorbing ads. On the subway I see this a lot, which is odd to me
because the subway is a great place to people watch. Whatever is happening on
Instagram is probably not going to be as interesting as the reality around you.

![Checking to see if we missed any emails or texts from 20 seconds ago](3.jpeg "Checking to see if we missed any emails or texts from 20 seconds ago")

These days is challenging to even walk around outside without having someone
bump into you because they're not looking where they're going. I have had
countless near misses with people who are walking around staring at their
phones, and in a few cases I've had people walk into me because they were so
absorbed in their phones. In some instances their phones went flying.

![My hand's main purpose is to hold my phone](4.jpeg "My hand's main purpose is to hold my phone")

You also see a lot of people walking around with their phones in their hand at
all times, even if they're not necessarily looking at it. It may be that they
don't have pockets, or perhaps they just don't know how to exist without
headphones and a phone in their hand. Boredom is pretty cool, people should try
it out.

![The best way to enjoy the museum is through your phone's camera](5.jpeg "The best way to enjoy the museum is through your phone's camera")

There are also those who feel the need to take pictures of everything they see,
while failing to simply...enjoy the experience. If you're going to go see Van
Gogh's Starry Night, you should definitely take your own photo of it because the
[incredibly high resolution photo on
Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Starry_Night#/media/File:Van_Gogh_-_Starry_Night_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg)
is not as good as your own! You came all this way to go to the MoMA, might as
well let everyone on Instagram know about it.

![My eyes don't have nearly as many pixels as my phone](6.jpeg "My eyes don't have nearly as many pixels as my phone")

I suppose I'm the odd one, because I don't see the appeal of staring at your
screen instead of existing in the reality around you. As a simpleton, I think
I'll stick with reality, but there must be something real special about the
multiverse that makes everyone incapable of disconnecting from it.
