---
title: "Seasons"
date: 2024-11-26T14:54:12-05:00
draft: false
tags:
- seasons
- winter
- reflection
- life metaphors
- appreciation
- gratitude
- perspective
- balance
- contrast
- adaptation
---

I don't love winter. It's certainly my least favourite season. While I grew up
in a relatively cold place with an unpleasant winter, I wouldn't say I'm better
adapted to it than anyone else. I do, however, have an appreciation for the
seasons and I try to (begrudgingly) enjoy winter just as much as summer.

New York City doesn't have a particularly harsh winter, it's relatively short
and seeing as NYC is subtropical, below freezing temperatures are rare. This is
especially true recently, with global warming making winters warmer and shorter.

If we think of the seasons as part of an annual cycle that looks something like
a sine wave from a distance, oscillating between cool and warm, then winter is
the low point and summer is the high point. The thing about the high point is
that everything is relative, and the low point is just as important for us to
appreciate the high point.

The seasons are a great metaphor for a lot of things in life, and I tend to
apply this to various things. It's fairly simple: we can't appreciate the highs
without the lows, and even though we dislike and avoid the lows, there's a
certain value in them mainly for the experience and the contrast they provide.

To use an example, let's consider food: if you only ever ate the best, dined at
the finest restaurants, and never had a bad meal, you would soon become
accustomed to such luxuries and they would quickly lose their value. As such, if
you make an effort to eat simple, basic meals (ideal with whole foods) and
occasionally have a bad meal, you will appreciate the good meals more. You won't
need to spend as much on fancier restaurants to get the same high. And when you
do splurge, on say, a Michelin star restaurant, you'll appreciate it that much
more.

With that line of thinking, next time you find yourself at a low point, just
remember that it does usually get better. Winter doesn't last forever, even when
it feels awfully long, cold, and dark. If you can make it past the winter
solstice, you're already beginning to come out the other side as the days begin
to grow longer and brighter.
