---
title: "The SEX Theorem of Hiring"
date: 2022-08-31T15:40:00-05:00
draft: false
tags:
- jobs
- hiring
- SEX theorem
- CAP theorem
---

Software engineers are likely familiar with the [CAP
theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem), something coined by Eric
Brewer. In short: the CAP theorem posits that distributed databases can have at
most 2 of 3 attributes where a database is either consistent, available, or
fault tolerant.

In other words, you can have a DB that is consistent and highly available, but
not fault tolerant. Or, you can have a DB that's fault tolerant and highly
available, but isn't always consistent (especially in the event of failure).

It's a simple and intuitive concept, which hasn't been disproven yet (i.e.,
nobody has created a distributed DB that has all 3 properties, though some may
claim otherwise, and they are probably trying to sell enterprise software nobody
needs).

A similar concept applies when hiring engineers. If you're trying to find
engineers, you'll have to choose candidates who have at most 2 of 3 of these
attributes:

* Being highly **s**killed
* Being highly **e**xperienced
* Being ine**x**pensive

I'm going to call this the "SEX theorem of hiring engineers".

As a corollary, we can then create 3 profiles for engineering candidates:

* The **SE**: a highly skilled and experienced engineer who does not come cheap. Sometimes colloquially known as the "10x engineer" (a term I dislike but often use tongue-in-cheek).
* The **SX**: typically a younger person, perhaps even a school dropout, and while they don't have much experience, they bring fresh perspective and incredible enthusiasm for the job. For them, this is a huge step up.
* The **EX**: probably the worst type of person you can hire, they might have a resume littered with nonsense, buzzwords, maybe a fancy school and degree or two, and they might also be very good at interviewing. They'll never make a meaningful contribution to your company, and spend most of their time trying to game their way up the corporate ladder. Some EXs are highly eloquent and persuasive, which is how they've managed to get as far as they have, but their GitHub profiles are unimpressive. An EX might make a great manager, but they are a terrible engineering hire.

To put it another way, you can certainly find people who are highly skilled
_and_ highly experienced, but they won't come cheap. You can't hire these people
unless you offer them decent wages, and for exceptionally talented individuals
there's a good chance you might not even be capable of judging their talents. It
takes an A engineer to identify an A engineer, and A engineers prefer working
with A engineers. B engineersÂ like to hire hire C engineers to make themselves
look better because they usually know they aren't As.

The SE is no fool and won't accept startup stock in lieu of a decent salary
because they understand probabilities and won't subsidize your VC funded startup
by accepting a low wage. They do still, however, expect a generous amount of
equity because they want to have skin in the game and benefit from the fruits of
their labour.

Some of the VC-funded startups tend to optimize (accidentally or not) for a
combination of SX and EX: they tend to hire people that are either super skilled
but inexperienced, or very experienced but actually suck at their jobs for the
most part. One reason for hiring SXs is that VCs often impose salary caps on
their portfolio companies (not officially of course, they don't want to run
afoul of labour regulations) by hinting that they won't invest in follow-up
rounds if the company spends too much on wages. EXs get hired because they went
to Stanford or their dad knows a partner at one of the VC firms.

As a job seeker, the companies above are to be avoided. If they try to make you
a lowball offer, it means they're probably making other people lowball offers
too, so they're unlikely to be staffed by the best and brightest.  Their
recruiters might try to bargain with "we have free kombucha and you can work
remote if you want!", however as nice as those things are, they're useless for
paying the rent or mortgage or daycare or what have you. SX engineers aren't
easily distracted by juvenile niceties either.

If you manage to hire _only_ SE engineers, then your company is exceptional and
I applaud you. In fact, this is the best hiring outcome, but also very unlikely
because SEs are few and far between. It starts to get ugly if you mix too many
EXs in, especially if they get hired into management or leadership roles. EXs
and SEs are like oil and water. EXs will try to manage the SEs and SXs, but the
SEs _really_ won't appreciate it. If your company is heavy on the SXs and EXs,
you might be in trouble.

So if I had one piece of advice for founders who are trying to avoid [fucking up
their
culture](https://medium.com/@bchesky/dont-fuck-up-the-culture-597cde9ee9d4), it
would be that you should hire SEs when possible, and while that may annoy your
investors now, they'll thank you later. Additionally, you can't hire SE people
unless you already have SE people, because SE people like to hang out with other
SE people and it takes one to know one.

SEs are also great matches for SXs, because they can help them grow and foster
the E, but in doing so you'll convert your SXs into SEs, and if you don't adjust
their comp accordingly they'll move on to greener pastures.

Lastly, the mythical SEX engineer does not exist, so don't bother trying. And
even if you manage to capture an SE at a low price, they won't stick around for
long.
