---
title: "Writing Things Down"
date: 2024-04-26T14:42:15-04:00
draft: false
tags:
- writing
- catharsis
- creativity
- thinking
---

Writing is not easy, and it's easier for some than others. Personally I don't
find it hard to write about things that interest me, but I know some do. I
suppose some types of writing are easier for me than others, i.e., I find
writing fiction difficult, so I don't do that. Perhaps I should try harder.

If I'm writing about a topic I'm interested in, I find the words flow easily.
The main problem I have is that my fingers don't go nearly as fast as my brain,
so I sometimes lose the words before they hit the page. They often come back to
me later, but not always.

As a student, I hated writing exercises, and I usually scored poorly on them. I
think the main reason I disliked them is that the way writing is taught in
schools is typically about following a rubric and set of rules. In the case of
essay writing, you must follow a specific structure taught in the class, and
failure to do so results in a poor grade. For creative writing or fiction, one
must use the correct story structure and satisfy the number of words or pages
that must be turned in to pass the assignment. Anything out of the ordinary is
discouraged.

As a grown-up operating in the unreal world of the Internet and blogs, I would
say there are no rules when it comes to writing, or any other creative endeavor
for that matter.

Grammar, spelling, and so on are important, but they are not the most important
part of writing, which is not how I was taught writing in school. In
school, the focus is mostly on grammar and spelling as opposed to content. I do,
however, remember a few occasions when I was lucky enough to get a good English
teacher who helped foster the more creative aspects of writing, and I am
grateful to those teachers.

I suppose that raises the question: what is the most important part of writing?
I think the answer depends on who the writer is, what their goals are, and, to
some degree, whether it's what the readers want. You can write for yourself
(i.e., private journal or diary entries) if you prefer, and maybe never read it
back. You can also broadcast your ideas on the Internet and perhaps someday
become a Thought Leader.

If you write for an audience and aim to communicate ideas, then the content is
likely the most important aspect of your writing. If you write for yourself,
then the act of writing itself is the most important part.

I learned a lot more about writing from reading than the actual practice of
writing. It's a lot like writing software in that the most important skill is
not writing the software but reading and understanding other people's code. The
same is true for writing. The more you read, the better you will write.

Alas, you still have to do the writing. You can't write without the writing.
Same with exercising, drawing, painting, playing a musical instrument, writing
software, or any other skill or talent or creative endeavor. You have to do the
work, put in the hours, and struggle until you produce something you are proud
of or maybe just something you can live with.

I've never liked my own writing. I dislike reading and editing what I write, and
going back and reading my old writings is something I cringe at the thought of.
For whatever reason, however, I keep writing, and people keep reading it. I
suppose that's a good thing, and I appreciate it, but I'm not proud of my
writing.

Writing is hard; it's not easy to structure your thoughts and put them into
words so that others can not only comprehend the words on the page but understand the thoughts in your brain the way you intend them to be understood.
Communication is not easy, most people (in my experience) suck at it, and the
main reason they suck is that they either don't say what they really want to say
or they don't say it in a way that the other person can understand, or they
don't say anything at all. And then, there are some people who treat communication as an exercise in manipulation as opposed to a way to share ideas.

The purpose of language is to be understood, and we place a lot of emphasis on
rules and structure and correctness, but these things are secondary to the main
purpose (communicating ideas). That's not to say I'm anti-grammar or whatever,
but you should never get hung up on such things if they get in the way of your
message. In fact, incorrectness can be a powerful tool in writing as part of
your style if you choose. Some of my favourite books used incorrect grammar and
spelling to great effect.

The neat thing about writing is that so long as the reader gets what you want
them to get from reading your writing, you are succeeding (assuming you want
anyone reading it at all). In the case where you're writing strictly for the act
of it, then the only thing that matters is that you did the writing. Everything
else be damned.

I write both for the act of writing and for the act of communicating ideas.
Sometimes, it's incredibly helpful to put words to paper (digital paper) as a
way to work through my thoughts. The mere act of choosing words and forming
sentences helps congeal the ideas in my brain into a solid form. Forming the right sentences to
describe a thing and communicate it to someone else brings you clarity. It's a
form of catharsis, and it's a good way to work through problems or ideas (in
addition to speaking and discussing with people about problems and ideas).

It's become a bit of a Thought Leader clich√© to blog about writing, so I guess
I'm part of the problem, but perhaps they're onto something.
