---
title: "When You're Authentic, Rejection Is a Gift"
date: 2024-07-03T15:40:38-04:00
draft: false
tags:
- rejection
- authenticity
- self-improvement
- cognitive behavioral therapy
---

Rejection always stings, and it may or may not get easier to handle over time as
you age and experience more rejections. Why it stings is complicated because
sometimes we anticipate rejection, but when it hits, it still feels bad.

I think of myself as an expert in rejection. I've been rejected by colleges,
jobs, friends, family, and romantic partners. I've been rejected by people I've
admired and respected, people I've loved and trusted, and even people I've never
met.

In every case, I suppose the other party had a good reason to do what they
needed to do. In some cases, it stung more than others, but in all cases, there
was a sense that I had failed in some way. Sometimes, I failed to meet the other
person's expectations, and sometimes, I failed to meet my own. In most cases,
there was a lesson to be learned (if nothing else, the lesson was to care less).

The thing about rejection is that it's less bad than when people say yes when
they want to say no. It's better to be rejected by someone who doesn't want you
than to be accepted by someone who doesn't want you. Both committing an act of
rejection and being on the receiving end is a bummer, but rejection is generally
an act of honesty and having the courage to say no when it might be hurtful.

When you're authentic with yourself and others, and someone rejects you for
being your authentic self, this is rarely bad (although it _feels_ bad when it
happens). The reason this is a good thing is simple: if someone doesn't like who
you are, it's best to avoid that person. Perhaps they rejected you out of
suspicion about your character, or perhaps they rejected you because they don't
like your personality. Either way, it's better to know now than later. And if
they misjudged you and were wrong about you, then it's likely a good
self-selection mechanism to avoid them.

Some people have taken to practicing [rejection
therapy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rejection_Therapy), which involves
seeking out rejection in order to desensitize oneself to it and in some cases
gamifying the process. This is a good way to build resilience and to learn that
rejection is not the end of the world. It's also a good way to learn that
rejection is not personal, and that it's often about the other person's
preferences and not about you. This last point is important to understand
because we tend to take rejection personally when it's (confusingly) rarely
about you.

Rejection therapy, as practiced, is similar to exposure therapy (exposing
oneself to sources of anxiety to reduce anxiety), and it generally fits within
the CBT (cognitive-behavioral therapy) framework in teaching oneself to care
less about things that aren't worth caring about in the grand scheme of things.

When I reflect upon my past life experiences and the rejections that felt the
worst at the time, I realize they were all gifts. As a corollary, I try politely
rejecting people when possible and being honest about my feelings and intentions
instead of stringing people on, ghosting, or simply lying. It's not always easy,
but it's the right thing to do.

The weird thing about being authentic is that it's also the best way to avoid
the worst rejections because you're more likely to attract the right people in
the right situations, whether it's personal, professional, or something else.
