---
title: "Fluidity vs. Rigidity"
date: 2023-08-31T14:45:12-04:00
draft: false
tags:
- fluidity
- rigidity
- ergodicity
---

A fluid is anything that _flows_, which includes gasses and liquids. Some
fluids even exhibit both properties of solids and liquids, such as in response
to shocks (i.e., [water with corn
starch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-Newtonian_fluid#Oobleck), a
"non-Newtonian fluid"). Ketchup is an example of a substance that does the
opposite: it exhibits solid properties until it's disturbed, after which it
flows, which is why shaking or pounding on the bottom of an upturned bottle of
ketchup will make it pour out.

{{< video autoplay="true" loop="true" src="base-isolation.mp4" classes="sm:max-w-[16rem] sm:float-left sm:ml-0 sm:mr-4 my-1" >}}
Rigitidy is resistance to flow. To be rigid means you respond to shocks by
pushing back, rather than changing shape or getting out of the way. The problem
with rigidity is that while it provides the appearance of strength, failures of
rigid systems and structures are catastrophic. Properly engineered structures
(bridges, buildings, roads, etc.) need to be mostly rigid, but simultaneously
provide enough give and take that they don't explode when a small breeze comes
along, or in the event of an extreme shock like an earthquake, avoid total collapse.

In markets and economics, we sometimes see examples of rigid systems blowing up
when exposed to shocks, which sometimes result in bailouts from governments and
central banks to protect from so-called "contagion" (i.e., spreading cracks can
cause other rigid systems to collapse).

Some substances are _incredibly_ rigid, to the point where they become brittle,
and may shatter when stressed. Examples of this are glass or hard plastic,
which–as you have likely experienced in your life–will shatter when dropped or
smashed. It's possible to harden glass or plastic, but with enough force
applied, [even the hardest substances will eventually
shatter](https://youtu.be/XBjiEsAyNQs?t=92). These substances are still
incredibly useful, but we know to carefully handle objects subject to such
failures.

To be fluid means to adapt, overcome, diffuse, and take the shape of the
container. [Ergodicity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ergodicity) is the
mathematical term for this concept, and it has some fascinating real-life
implications. In simple terms, proving ergodicity allows us to consider small
samples as representative of the whole, which provides an opportunity to obtain
results by sampling.

The advantage of fluidity as it relates to ergodicity and life is that you
don't necessarily need to experience the whole of anything in its entirety, a
sufficiently sized sample will do. For example, you don't need to become an
Olympic athlete to find out of you're good enough for the Olympics: you only
need to play the sport a few times (or for a few seasons) to see if you're
better or worse than your peers, or to figure out if you even enjoy it.

Rigid systems will almost always blow up when exposed to unexpected or
unplanned shocks. The cure for poorly designed rigid systems is to allow them
to blow up, because it makes sure those systems no longer exist, and you're
only left with fluid systems. Failure is nature's way of getting rid of the bad
stuff. An often cited example of this in real life is the case of [Abraham Wald
and WW2 bombers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Survivorship_bias#Military), in
which they chose to reinforce the parts of the planes that _weren't_ damaged,
provided they managed to survive battles, as opposed to reinforcing the parts of the plane that had been damaged.

Fluid systems only blow up where they meet the rigid parts, which is typically
around joints or interfaces that haven't been properly designed to cope with
stresses. Interestingly, the fluid parts of the system tend to help absorb
shorts anyway, which makes tolerances much higher in a partially fluid system,
rather than a strictly rigid system.

Rigid people struggle to adapt as the world changes around them, when they
experience hardship, or when things don't go their way. Those who are rigid
expect authority to step in and save them, as opposed to learning to help
themselves. Rigid people tend not to survive in a world where survival is all
that counts.

People who are fluid go with the flow, they understand that nothing lasts
forever, they adapt to the world around them, and they fill the container
they're in. Fluid people don't bother fighting the trends–as much as they may
not like them–and they learn to take advantage of opportunities. Those who are
fluid understand that success in life is mostly about luck, but that you can
increase your luck by working to maximize exposure to opportunities and making
asymmetric upside bets where the downside is limited.
