---
title: "The Value of Tools"
date: 2023-02-19T13:32:10-05:00
draft: false
tags:
  - tools
  - creation
  - art
---

Tools are often cited as an example of what separates humans from most other
animals.  And while it's true that other animals also use tools, humans are a
bit unique in that we've also developed tools that make tools. My dogs (I have
two, Doge and Walter) occasionally utilize tools, but due to their lack of
opposable thumbs their tool usage is quite limited. My dogs' use of tools tends
to be limited to acts which involve food or play.

Tools are not a great example of what makes humans special (a better example
might be the use of money, the formation of societies and institutions, and
knowledge sharing aka "memes"), but it's fair to say humans take tooling to a
level unparalled in the animal kingdom.

![Walter](L1000185.jpg "Walt with a toy")

There are much better examples than dogs of animals who employ tools, such as
birds using sticks to get at hard to catch insects, or how octopuses use coconut
shells to build shelters. For humans, however, I'd argue that our creation of
tooling is arguably the most clever thing we do. In many ways, the only output
of technology are tools: it's sometimes hard to understand what the purpose of
the tool is, and how it works exactly, but nearly everything we build these days
is a tool of some form.

![Doge](L1000186.jpg "Doge with a rubber bone")

Some tools are certainly more useful than others. For example, media is a tool
for shaping the global consciousness, sometimes wielded by those with far more
power than they deserve, like the modern day media barons and oligarchs. You may
have heard the phrase ["the medium is the
message"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_medium_is_the_message), which the
[BBC also did a nice explainer on](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ko6J9v1C9zE),
and once understood properly is very difficult to un-understand. The media is
not so much about delivering messages, but rather it's a modern day tool for
controlling which messages are permitted to exist in the minds of those who tune
in to the media delivery systems.

Let me try and get back on track here: I think tools are fantastic, and in
software development in particularly, tools are _massively_ underrated. The most
impactful technology companies of the current era got to where they are by
creating tools:

* The early internet pioneers created _email_, a way to send electronic mail to
  anyone anywhere on the globe, which later evolved into _instant messaging_,
  arguably one of the most valuable inventions that came out of the internet.
  Instant messaging has since been spun off into countless specialized messaging
  platforms.
* Browsers were developed as a way to visualize and navigate content on the
  internet through a web of links between documents. The web browser is a tool
  that unlocked an incredible amount of new technologies.
* Google made a search index that used a reputation-based algorithm called
  "PageRank" (a pun on how one cofounder was named _Page_) to
  build a search engine that was remarkably useful at the time.
* Facebook created a simple tool for connecting with friends and family,
  exchanging messages, sharing photos, arguing about moral panics, political
  opinions, and spamming your conspiracy theories.
* Twitter came up with a simple way to spam your "followers", which are people
  who willingly subscribe to your spams, for some reason or another. Why this is
  considered a good thing continues to perplex me.

You may notice that most of the examples I gave above related to advertising
companies. Marshall McLuhan (of "the medium is the message" fame) [also had much
to say about ads](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gqaRAmO3SCg).

{{< figure
    src="archimedes.jpg"
    alt="Archimedes lever, Mechanics Magazine 1824"
    caption="Archimedes lever, Mechanics Magazine 1824"
    class="sm:max-w-[20rem] sm:float-right sm:mr-0 sm:ml-4 my-1"
    >}}
In terms of our day to day lives, tools provide us with _leverage_, they allow
us to accomplish more with less, we can automate repetitive tasks, and we can of
course achieve tooling nirvana by creating tools that make the tools for us.

At some point the tools become so complex that we forget to think about tools as
compositions of other tools either through supply chains or abstractions built
atop abstractions, and instead we think of these tools as magic. Software seems
to have this modern day appeal as being magical, so much so that we have started
referring to any kind of software that appears complex beyond explanation as
"AI". This is especially valuable to sales and marketing people who are trying
to ride the AI hype wave which seems to have had a new renassaince recently
thanks to some recent advances in text generation.

One well known historical figure was a person named Leonardo from a town called
Vinci in the Tuscany region of Italy. During his lifetime he was most well known
for his artwork which included paintings and sculptures. Later he became more
well known for his writings, contraptions, ideas, and various other creations
which we mostly know about through his writings.

What's interesting about Leonardo's story is that he invented _tools_ to help
create the timeless art we know him for today. The tools he invented allowed him
to hide brushstrokes in the _Mona Lisa_, or present a mythological scene with a
non-distorted perspective in _The Last Supper_. Prior to Leonardo's use of these
techniques, art looked quite wonky to say the least.  Leonardo published his
[_Treatise on Painting_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Treatise_on_Painting)
with the general theme that painting (perhaps art, more generally) was in fact a
science, not an art. One keen observation Leonardo made is presented as the
_branching rule_, which is:

> All the branches of a tree at every stage of its height when put together are
> equal in thickness to the trunk

What's most interesting about Leonardo's observation is that it is, itself, a
_tool_. You can apply this rule as a tool in your own artwork to make your trees
look more realistic (if that's the goal).

To sum up my core thesis in this rambling essay, I think the greatest value from
technology is the creation of tools. The act of creation of any kind (whether
it's art, tooling, food, or anything else that is new or novel) is the highest
form of value creation. Merely hoarding wealth doesn't _create_ value, because
money is imaginary and on its own it cannot _create_ anything, unless you use
that money to pay someone who _is_ creative and has the skills to create new
things like tools and art and cooking techniques that produce delicious foods.

In other words: to create real value, focus on building tools that solve real
problems or unlock new technologies.
