---
title: "Why We Lie to Ourselves"
date: 2023-01-16T11:22:57-05:00
draft: false
tags:
- lies
- positivity
- philosophy
---

Lies are easy. It's easy to pretend _your_ problems are someone _else's_ fault.
It's easy to pretend when things don't go _your_ way, that it's the _other_
party's fault. We tell ourselves many lies to get through the day. Being honest
is very challenging, and it's _especially_ hard to be honest with ourselves.

It's easy to pretend you're smarter than you are, or you know better than
others, or you're more emotionally secure than you actually are, or you're more
confident in your skin than you actually are. You could call these
self-confidence _cons_, that we use as psychological tricks to help us get on
with the reality that we're all mostly mediocre, not special, and just like
everyone else. Some are more lucky than others, but nobody is special.

It takes a lot of courage and strength to look closely at yourself, and
recognize your faults. It takes even more strength to acknowledge those faults,
work toward improving them, and in other cases learning to let it go and just
accept yourself for what you are.

There's much we can change about ourselves: you can improve your diet, exercise
more, be more kind to others, put more effort into maintaining relationships.
But, at the same time, there's much we can't change: our skin colour or racial
makeup, who our parents are, which genetalia we were born with, and the degree
to which society and culture influences who we are.

Maybe you want to "rise above" it all and reach Giga Brain Enlightenment status
on another plain somewhere in the metaverse of your mind, but eventually you
have to remember you're just a person who needs to go to the grocery store and
stock up on coffee so you can get on with your day tomorrow.

I started with the bottom line of this post up front: we lie to ourselves
because it makes life a bit easier. It allows us to avoid confronting ourselves,
how we treat others, and our excuses for not improving ourselves where we can.

Perhaps, as a mental exercise, try getting through the day without telling
yourself any lies during your inner dialogue sessions. It may reveal things
about yourself that you hadn't considered before, offering another path for self
improvement that you can lie to yourself about until you choose to stop.

I suppose this post falls under the category of self-help BS, but my brain
sometimes produces these thoughts, and occasionally I write it down, perhaps as
an act of therapy. And for some reason, people keep emailing me telling me they
enjoying reading them, so I keep writing them.
