---
title: When Bureaucracy Is the Goal
date: 2022-10-05T06:13:43.000Z
draft: false
tags:
  - bureaucracy
  - big tech
  - jobs
  - career
  - interviews
  - hiring
  - corporations
  - absurdity
  - institutionalization
  - work culture
  - organizational psychology
  - tech industry
---

I had the recent pleasure of speaking with someone from a big tech company about
their interview process. They wanted to put me through the funnel to run the
gauntlet and see if I "had what it takes" to make it to the offer stage. I
declined, but (against better judgement) I gave them 30 minutes to pitch their
company to me anyway.

The conversation wasn't particularly interesting or insightful, and I didn't
learn anything new. It did, however, inspire me to write a blog thingy.

I couldn't help but be reminded of Albert Camus's book [_The
Stranger_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Stranger_(Camus_novel)), an absurd
tale of a man convicted of murder. I won't try to summarize the book here, but I
hope anyone reading along who's also read this book would nod in agreement. Also
if you haven't read the book, please do for your own sake.

Anyway, I tried to explain to the recruiter how I felt interviewing at this company wasn't worth my time for 2 reasons:

1. I'm terrible at interviewing, and having run the gauntlet at every big techie several times, I can tell you I probably won't pass because I'm no better at interviews today than I was in the 2000s.
2. They wanted me to interview at a level that I would consider O.K. for me about 10 years ago, so even if I aced their leetcoding and managed to get an offer, I am pretty sure it would have been disappointing to me. This I didn't mention to the recruiter because they weren't in a position to do anything about it.

With a lot of these big tech companies, they treat humans like cattle (which is
what we also do with computers). The goal is to maximize the number of subjects
through the funnels, weed out the ones that aren't good at interviews, and in
the end you're left with interview rockstars so you can pick from the 90th
percentile or whatever.

Research supports this critique. A [meta-analysis published in Personnel Psychology](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1998.tb00727.x) found that structured interviews—the kind favored by tech companies—are surprisingly modest predictors of actual job performance. Even with the best interview techniques, the correlation between interview scores and job performance typically ranges from 0.2 to 0.4, meaning interview skills explain only about 4-16% of the variance in how well someone actually does their job.

The absurdity here, of course, is that this is a perfect example of stupid
selection. The skills required for passing job interviews have nothing to do
with outcomes for employees doing jobs. Regardless of what job you do, almost
nobody is doing the job of passing job interviews all day. In the case of
software engineering, you're either building software or managing people
building software, or perhaps you groom the kanban boards or whatever.

In any case, interviews aren't about doing the things you do in jobs. Interviews
are mostly about how you make the interviewer feel, whether or not you can solve
the puzzles the way the interviewer likes them solved in the amount of time
provided, and whether or not you are willing to endure whatever institutional
bureaucracy this particular company has decided is necessary to "hire the best"
or whatever.

Google's own internal research, known as [Project Oxygen](https://hbr.org/2013/12/how-google-sold-its-engineers-on-management), found that the most important skills for successful employees were soft skills like coaching, communication, and empathy—precisely the things that traditional tech interviews rarely test for. Meanwhile, coding puzzles and algorithm questions, which dominate technical interviews, ranked relatively low as predictors of on-the-job success.

It's a bit funny, and the worst part is that it seems to work for most of these
companies. They probably miss out on the cream of the crop, but it doesn't
matter because they really only need to make sure that the bottom 60th
percentile or so never makes it into the company, and they can stay on top. All
the people who can't pass a big tech interview can go work at a big bank
instead.

This aligns with what organizational psychologists call "satisficing" behavior—companies aren't trying to find the absolute best candidate (optimizing) but rather seeking to avoid hiring truly bad ones (satisficing). As [Herbert Simon noted](https://doi.org/10.2307/1884513) in his Nobel Prize-winning work, organizations typically adopt decision-making processes that are "good enough" rather than optimal.

![Tech innovation](tech.jpg "Tech innovation stock photography with watermarks")

These companies _do_ make exceptions to their "innovative"
hire-by-blind-committee policies, but generally only in "exceptional" cases
which just means for people with lots of internet followers. For people who are
highly skilled but don't care much about clout chasing, you are SOL unless you
were Stanford roomies with the CEO.

The data backs this up. One [analysis of tech hiring from researchers at MIT and Columbia](https://www.nber.org/papers/w28925) found that candidates from elite universities were 34% more likely to receive interviews than equally qualified candidates from less prestigious institutions. And according to [LinkedIn's Economic Graph Research](https://economicgraph.linkedin.com/), approximately 40% of senior hires at FAANG companies circumvent standard hiring processes entirely.

These companies _don't want_ to hire very smart or talented people, either. Very
smart and talented people have lower tolerance thresholds for dumb processes and
arbitrary bureaucracy, so they don't make good employees. The big companies want
to hire highly institutionalized people who will follow the boss's commands and
make the widgets to specification. This is one reason why they love hiring young
people from expensive schools: those people have already mastered the art of
achieving high scores on pointless standardized tests and filling out paperwork
according to the set of rules laid out by whoever is in charge.

As sociologist [Robert Jackall observed in his book "Moral Mazes"](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/moral-mazes-9780199729883), large bureaucracies tend to reward conformity over competence. The ideal candidate isn't the brilliant disruptor but the reliable conformist who "fits the culture"—corporate code for someone who won't rock the boat.

I don't think we've reached the peak of big tech yet, but I do think all of
these companies will slowly become irrelevant and more consumer-hostile. Our
best hope is that the EU enforces antitrust legislation against them, which
spawns a set of new competitors. That won't happen in the US, however, because
the US government is corrupted by the lobbyists with the deepest pockets. A
handful of companies control the main platforms of the internet, and none of
them are going to let anyone else come in and take that away from them.

The difference in regulatory approach is stark: while the US has been relatively hands-off, the EU has implemented the [Digital Markets Act](https://digital-markets-act.ec.europa.eu/index_en) specifically targeting large tech platforms. Perhaps we need more of that absurdist energy—recognizing the fundamental disconnect between what these companies claim to value (innovation, disruption) and what their bureaucratic hiring practices actually select for (conformity, institutional thinking).
