---
title: "Cities Are Technology"
date: 2024-04-04T13:36:02-04:00
draft: false
tags:
- cities
- technology
- cars
- pollution
- climate change
- urban design
---
![A future no one asked for.](cover.png "It's not the future we wanted, but what we got. The backward cars and other weirdness are good examples of why we are not 'AI' yet.")

When people think of _technology_ they likely imagine your typical futurology:
robots, artificial intelligence, and space travel. But technology is more
interesting than science fiction porn. It's the way we manipulate the world
around us. It's the way we shape our environment to suit our needs. And in that
sense, cities _are_ technology.

By one definition, technology is the application of science to solve problems.
And cities are the embodiment of that. They are the result of thousands of years
of problem-solving. They are the product of human ingenuity and creativity. They
are the ultimate expression of our desire to shape the world and our expertise
at adaptation.

I'm a massive fan of cities. I think cities are underrated and underloved as
what is probably HuMaNiTy's most outstanding technological achievement. We tend
to think about small individual technologies. Still, we tend not to think about
technology in its totality, and the city is the ultimate expression of the power
of technology.

## But cars are bad

If you've been reading my blog, you may not be surprised to realize this is yet
another post about why cars suck. We are seeing a shift in how we think about
urban design, specifically our accommodation of cars, particularly amongst the
younger demographics who've realized that this suburban hellscape isn't so
great.

We are starting to realize that cars are not the best way to move people around
cities. Cars are inefficient, dangerous, and harmful to the delicate environment
that gives us life. That environment allows us to exist (no, _thrive_) on this
tiny speck of dust floating in the vastness of space, and no amount of stock
market returns can make up for it. We've only got this one planet, and Elon Musk
cannot save us with his rockets and electric cars.

## The solution is there

It's no secret I'm somewhat of a doomer regarding the climate crisis. At this
point, we have no choice but to go down the path of geoengineering, as we can't
put the cat back in the bag, and all the metrics are accelerating in the wrong
direction (woopsie doodle!). For the long-term survival of our species, we'll
have to block out the sun somehow or magically AI some carbon out of the
atmosphere. But that's a topic for another post.

But there is still some hope, or at the very least, we can make things suck a
lot less. Why not invest in our cities instead of bailing out failing
automakers? We can make our cities more livable, sustainable, and enjoyable. We
can make them places where people want to live, work, and play. We can make them
places where people can thrive and be happy without the loud, noxious, and
obnoxious steel death boxes zooming around and clogging up our public spaces. We
can plant trees, expand parks instead of parking spaces, and build
infrastructure that supports walking, cycling, and public transit. We can make
cities that work for people instead of cars.

I'm not saying it will be easy. I'm not saying it will be cheap. But I am saying
it would be nice. One can dream.
