---
title: "Nobody Is Coming to Save You"
date: 2021-02-14T09:33:44-06:00
draft: false
tags:
- disney princess fallacy
- collapse
- elon
---

Something I've noticed in recent times, and it may or may not be a trend–I'm
not sure–is the idea that someone somewhere in a position of authority knows
what's going on, how to fix it, and they're coming to save us. Probably a
good example of this at a mass level was the 2020 Biden election, where
scores of people were convinced that the world would go back to normal and
evil would be defeated if Biden won.

This [appeal to
authority](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument_from_authority) has little
basis in reality, and I can only view it as harmful. Why is it harmful? Among
other reasons, people tend to ignore the facts, the outcomes, and reality of
things, and instead focus all their attention on the _characters_ and
personalities involved. It doesn't matter whether it's Trump, Biden, Elon,
Obama, or whoever. People are so obsessed with celebrity worship, authority,
and tribalism that they can't smell smoke when everything's burning around
them.

Celebrities don't solve problems, they aren't technology, they're just
caricatures of society. No celebrity can magically stop climate change, no
matter how good their speechwriters may be.

## We are in big trouble

At the current moment, humans are headed for extinction. We simply cannot
continue our current levels of breeding and consumption without destroy our
habitat, and thus making ourselves (and society as we currently know it) a
thing of the past.

This isn't an opinion, it's a fact rooted in mountains of data. Some people
are choosing to ignore the problem, others are in denial, some are
bargaining. In any case, the outcome is the same provided there aren't
immediate drastic changes (which...there won't be, because capitalism).

All the metrics are moving in the wrong direction, and the rate of change is
accelerating. At this point, it's probably too late, and the best we can do
is prepare for the worst.

## The Disney princess fallacy

One thing I often like to talk about (but I think most people hate hearing
about) is the Disney princess fallacy. What's that, you ask? Let me explain:
most people receive their culture and information from cultural exporters
like Hollywood. Disney films, in particular, are a great example of taking
the exact same plot, remixing it over and over, selling it to millions of
people with fresh new songs and new animations without actually doing
anything fundamentally different, new, informative, interesting, or
insightful.

Disney's movies are easy to digest, easy to comprehend, and they always have a
feel good hit of dopamine at the end.

The classic Disney film is one where there's a beautiful princess who just
needs to find herself married to the prince and all will be well. Once she
fulfills her destiny, all the problems in the world evaporate, and they live
happily ever after.

A lot of kids get their Disney brainwashing from a very early age. They're
trained to expect the outcome in the end is always positive, and if it's not,
some authority will step in to make it right. In some cases it's deity, in
other cases it's some kind of superhero. The actual plot doesn't matter so
much.

## Maybe there's no happy ending?

![Buying a Tesla won't save the planet?](confused.jpg "Buying a Tesla won't save the planet?")

One tough conclusion I've reached recently is that we (humans, that is) are
headed in the wrong direction, and we're accelerating toward our own demise.

There's an unstoppable climate crisis facing us right now, and there's no way
to stop it without extreme and immediate changes. However, these changes
would really put a dent in the Disney princess lifestyle we've all come to
fantasize about thanks to all the cultural programming we've received over
the decades from our corporate overlords.

Elon's not going to save us, he's just a car salesman who enjoys fame and
attention. Biden isn't going to save us, he's only got a few years left and
all he cares about is his comfortable retirement.
