---
title: "Cars Are Insane"
date: 2022-10-04T12:19:27-05:00
draft: false
tags:
- cars
- pollution
- climate change
- health
---
![Cars, lol](cars.jpg "Photo by Denys Nevozhai")

If you happen to know me personally, you are probably familiar with my opinions
on cars, and likely tired of hearing about them. I belong to the group of people
who frequent subs like [r/fuckcars](https://www.reddit.com/r/fuckcars/). My
favourite YouTube channels are "Not Just Bikes" and "Climate Town".

I've had the opinion (for a while now) that if humans manage to avoid climate
chaos induced extinction, we'll look back on internal combustion engine era of
personal transportation as a ridiculous period in human life much like
feudalism, slavery, pea soupers, and whatever else. For all the technology and
brain power we have, we have chosen to build our entire modern society around
the worst form of transportation.

Granted, cars have certain advantages from a strictly utilitarian point of view.
However, I'm focusing on the lifestyle that the majority of city dwelling
westerners live today which is one where cars are largely unecessary.

Some people will find ways to argue that we _need_ cars, such as pointing out
how convenient it is for them when they go grocery shopping or whatever, but
most of these strawmen arguments are weak at best, with a few odd exceptions
here and there. I'd argue most of the arguments for the "need" of cars are just
marketing talking points that don't stand up to scrutiny.

For the most part, I will happily declare here on my personal blog that most
people do not need a car, can live happily without one, and are better off
without them.

To understand why cars are so insane, we have to think about them in terms of
their costs and benefits. The costs of cars is very high: pollution, death from
crashes, economic cost in terms of ownership, road maintenance, and all the
busywork that goes in to dealing with all the problems cars create.

To understand the cost in terms of health, let's look at the [leading causes of
death in the US](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/leading-causes-of-death.htm):

{{< chart >}}
type: 'pie',
options: {
    responsive: true,
},
data: {
  labels: [
    'Heart disease',
    'Cancer',
    'COVID-19',
    'Accidents (unintentional injuries)',
    'Stroke (cerebrovascular diseases)',
    'Chronic lower respiratory diseases',
    "Alzheimer’s disease",
    'Diabetes',
    'Influenza and pneumonia',
    'Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, and nephrosis',
  ],
  datasets:[{
    label: 'Number of deaths, 2020',
    data: [
        696962,
        602350,
        350831,
        200955,
        160264,
        152657,
        134242,
        102188,
        53544,
        52547,
     ],
    backgroundColor: [
        '#b03060',
        '#ff0000',
        '#006400',
        '#00008b',
        '#ffd700',
        '#7cfc00',
        '#00ffff',
        '#ff00ff',
        '#6495ed',
        '#ffdab9',
    ],
    borderColor: [
        '#b03060',
        '#ff0000',
        '#006400',
        '#00008b',
        '#ffd700',
        '#7cfc00',
        '#00ffff',
        '#ff00ff',
        '#6495ed',
        '#ffdab9',
    ],
    },
  ]
}
{{< /chart >}}

A lot of these causes are likely connected to automobiles. Heart disease? Can
likely be lessened with more exercise. Cancer? Likely made worse by pollution,
of which cars are a huge contributor, both directly and indirectly. Diabetes?
Cars. Respiratory diseases? Cars (pollution). "Accidents"? A big part of that is
cars (about 40k per year, give or take), although when you crash a car it's
almost never an "accident". Every time you get in a car, that's intentional,
unless you have been kidnapped.

Digging a bit deeper into the pollution problem, something around [6-7 million
deaths are caused by
pollution](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanplh/article/PIIS2542-5196(22)00090-0/fulltext).
It's hard to separate the pollution that is directly linked to cars (i.e.,
emissions from internal combustion engines, tire particles, brake dust, etc)
from the indirect pollution (i.e., pollution from the industrial complex around
cars), however we can reasonably say it's a significant portion.

Certainly within cities, cars are the main cause of direct pollution, which
causes a variety of diseases including cancer, respiratory problems, and so on.

{{< figure
    src="DARK_CLOUDS_OF_FACTORY_SMOKE_OBSCURE_CLARK_AVENUE_BRIDGE_-_NARA_-_550179.jpg"
    alt="Dark Clouds of Factory Smoke Obscure Clark Avenue Bridge"
    class="max-w-[24rem] float-right mr-0 ml-4 my-1"
    caption="Dark Clouds of Factory Smoke Obscure Clark Avenue Bridge. Cleveland, Ohio, 1970, EPA."
    >}}

You can also make the argument that car infrastructure creates pollution by
removing natural space from the surface of the Earth. A freeway means fewer
plants and trees that would normally help scrub a tiny amount of that pollution
out of the atmosphere. It's been shown that by adding greenery adjacent to
roads, it also reduces pollution, but not as much as just not having a road.

Road pollution has been [linked to dementia, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer’s disease
and multiple
sclerosis](https://ehjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12940-020-0565-4).
It's also been [linked to lung
cancer](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4448375/),
[diabetes](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpla/article/PIIS2542-5196(18)30140-2/fulltext),
[heart disease](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2844969/), and
more. [The EPA has a roundup of some more data
here](https://www.epa.gov/mobile-source-pollution/research-health-effects-exposure-risk-mobile-source-pollution).

For a long time cars were the leading direct cause of death for young people in the US,
although [guns and opioid overdoses recently took the
crown](https://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/animated-leading-causes.html) for
[specific
cohorts](https://www.npr.org/2022/04/22/1094364930/firearms-leading-cause-of-death-in-children).
I wouldn't call that an improvement, or an excuse for cars.

It makes you wonder: how much are we willing to poison ourselves to make sure
the car companies keep posting record profits? Why have we built all our cities
and infrastructure around the car, which is arguably the worst health problem
we've ever created? Have people never heard of trains? Did we forget how to walk
places? Does New York City really need all those annoying (and dangerous) cars?

Cars are insane.
