---
title: "Leetcoding Interviews"
date: 2022-08-16T08:45:50-05:00
draft: false
tags:
- tech jobs
- interviewing
- programming
---

I still remember a time when leetcoding interviews were less common, and then
all of a sudden, they became the norm. Even for jobs that have nothing to do
with leetcoding, it seems that most "tech" companies have galvanized around the
idea that before you can hire anyone they must first prove that they can
adequately impress someone with their skills at coding during an interview.

The problem with the whole leetcoding interview phenomenon is that its goal is
orthogonal to its outcome. The _goal_ of these interviews is to assess whether a
candidate can, in fact, write useful software in a useful setting. It's a way of
filtering out people who either have no idea how to code, or just suck at it.

The _outcome_ of these interviews is that they've turned into an arbitrary,
non-standard, pseudoscientific exercise that likely has more to do with how the
interviewee makes the interviewer _feel_ rather than any objective assessment of
one's abilities.

Don't get me wrong, I have been guilty of enjoying being on the side of the
table where you get to feel powerful because you're asking "hard questions"
about how to optimize contrived problems that you'll rarely encounter in real
life. It's a power trip, that's for sure.

I guess the question is: what is the alternative? Some companies do "take home"
tests instead of 1 hour interviews, some companies use code presentations or
walk-throughs. I'm not sure these are any better, and I'm not really sure they
properly assess anything either.

Part of the problem, I think, is that interviews are generally about ego and
power asymmetry. The person interviewing is usually in the low power position,
and the interviewer is in the high power position. The interviewer expects the
interviewee to acknowledge their imagined authority in some way, either with
flattery or feigned admiration. If the interviewer breaks this contract (i.e.,
doesn't express their admiration) the interviewer will of course feel like the
candidate "doesn't have what it takes".

There are a lot of people on HN who talk about this, and I generally agree with
the comments that leetcoding is a pointless exercise that tells you nothing
about how good of an employee someone will be. But, simultaneously, I can't
think of a better alternative to make sure the person you're hiring is in fact
capable of making software.

A few companies have tried to make leetcoding a bit more objective, by doing
standardized tests with calibrated results, and perhaps these are better, but in
spite of all that the final decision almost always comes down to how you can
make the interviewer feel at the end of the day.
