---
title: "Random Walks"
date: 2022-10-14T12:55:20-05:00
draft: false
tags:
- markets
- life
- randomness
---
Life is a series of random walks. Even if you walk the same path every day (in
the literal sense), your individual steps on every walk you take are essentially
random, and for the most part you aren't even conscious of them because this is
handled by muscle memory.

When I say the steps are random, what I mean is that if you could precisely
measure every step you take, where your foot lands, how much force you apply
with your individual muscles to all the components of your leg and foot and
torso and so on, the data would appear to match a pattern from a statistically
perspective, but each individual step would have a normal random distribution.

I will confess, I spend too much time paying attention to stock market
gyrations. Most of the day to day ups and downs are random, and this has been
demonstrated by a bunch of people much smarter than me. Of course, if you pay
too much attention to "the news", you'll start to believe that there's always a
cause or reason for why the stocks go up or down, but in reality the system is
too complex to really say one way or another.

It's true that over longer time horizons (i.e., months and years) you can
reasonably establish causal relationships, but certainly at the micro level
(i.e., daily moves) what markets do is mostly random.

<figure class="sm:max-w-[16rem] sm:float-right sm:mr-0 sm:ml-4 my-1">
  <a href="Random_walk.svg">
    <img class="my-0 rounded-md bg-white p-2" src="Random_walk.svg" alt="A random walk" />
  </a>
  <figcaption>Do you see a pattern? You shouldn't because it's a random walk, from Wikipedia.</figcaption>
</figure>

It's helpful to think about this sometimes: you don't always _need_ to find an
explanation for everything. Humans are special in that our brains are pattern
matching algos on hyperdrive at all times, except perhaps while we sleep. We're
always looking for symbolism, higher meaning, yadda yadda, but most of the time
our daily events are quite random outside of ordinary routines.

For example, if I'm on a morning walk and a neighbour who's usually friendly and
says "hi!" when they pass snubs me, I could either take offense to it, or
realize that maybe they're preoccupied with something else in _their_ life at
the moment. I likely don't matter enough in their lives for them to go out of
their way to be rude to me, which is liberating.

It's easy to get annoyed about interactions like this: maybe the barista made a
mistake with your coffee order, or perhaps a package you ordered didn't arrive
on time. We tend to let these random things annoy us when they aren't worth our
own time, to be frank.

A lot of random data is, I suspect, just a [Rorschach
test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rorschach_test), and we tend to see what we
want to see. Market's up today? Must be the great news about \<thing\>! Market
down today? Must be because \<compnay\> had a bad earnings report! Maybe it is,
but you can't prove it, and there might be some truth to such movements but it's
still mostly random.

You should just assume there's a bit of randomness in everything, and when
something doesn't happen the way you expect, or you can't figure out why a thing
happened the way it happened, you may have just been tricked by randomness.
