---
title: How I Lost $7 Million
date: 2025-03-27T15:53:26.000Z
draft: false
tags:
  - failure
  - personal finance
  - investing
  - entrepreneurship
  - debt
  - financial mistakes
  - life lessons
  - crypto
  - stock market
  - startups
  - risk management
  - leverage
  - wealth psychology
  - personal growth
  - stock options
---

The year is 2025. I'm turning 40 soon, sitting in a cramped 450-square-foot
apartment with thin walls, $50,000 in credit card debt, and a credit score of
646. My financial worth: $100 in liquid assets. My net worth: deeply negative.

Five years ago, I was worth over $7 million.

This isn't a story about market crashes or economic downturns. This is a story
about human fallibility—specifically, mine. If you're looking for a cautionary
tale about greed, overconfidence, and the psychological pitfalls of sudden
wealth, welcome. I've lived it all so you don't have to.

## The Unlikely Millionaire

My journey to millions began in 2013 at age 27. Fresh off being fired from
Newfield Wireless and sharing a house with five roommates, I was a Canadian on a
TN visa—meaning I needed employment quickly or I'd be forced back across the
border.

My job search led me to a promising startup called Airbnb. After acing their
technical interviews (partly because I wrote my solution in C++ while other
candidates used slower languages like Ruby and Python), I landed an offer:
$120,000 base salary plus 12,500 stock options.

I turned down competing offers with higher salaries, enchanted by Airbnb's
mission and potential. Those 12,500 options would eventually multiply to 72,000
through stock splits. Though I only stayed 22 months, my vesting period earned
me 33,000 shares:

{{< katex >}}
$$
{22 \over 48} \times 72,000 = 33,000
$$

Expressed another way:

$$
{22 \over 48} = {33,000 \over 72,000}
$$

Fast forward to February 2021: Airbnb's post-IPO stock price peaked at $216 per
share. My stake: $7.1 million. I had won the Silicon Valley lottery, something I
will probably never do again.

## From Millionaire to Miscalculator

The cracks had already begun forming years earlier, around 2017, after I left my
post-Airbnb position at Mesosphere. Following a string of unsuccessful
interviews at tech giants, I pivoted toward what seemed like another golden
opportunity: cryptocurrency.

I built trading bots just before the 2018 crypto boom and rode the wave to
another brief millionaire status. But when the market crashed, I doubled down
instead of diversifying. I sank $250,000 into a Bitcoin mining operation that
quickly became worthless. I gave away significant sums, operating from a mindset
of abundance that would soon prove illusory.

After an unpleasant stint at Citadel followed by a position at Braze, I made
what I now recognize as my fatal financial mistake: leaving stable employment to
chase entrepreneurial dreams without adequate preparation or risk management. I
launched a series of startups that each failed in uniquely educational but
financially devastating ways.

## The Unraveling

By 2020, pre-Airbnb IPO, my financial situation had deteriorated to the point
where I could no longer afford my rent. I was surviving on day trading from a
Robinhood account when COVID hit, bringing market volatility that demolished
what remained of my non-Airbnb portfolio.

When Airbnb finally went public and my six-month lockup period ended, I had my
second chance at financial security. Instead, I saw it as an opportunity to
recover my previous losses through increasingly complex and leveraged market
positions. I was playing a game I didn't fully understand with stakes I couldn't
afford to lose.

The numbers tell the story with brutal efficiency:

On June 18, 2021, my Interactive Brokers account showed $5.1 million.

![Interactive Brokers account balance on June 18, 2021: $5.1 million](1.png)

One year later, that same account held just $264,000.

![Interactive Brokers account balance on June 17, 2022: $264 thousand](2.png)

The following years brought a perfect storm of continued financial mistakes,
failed startups, and personal challenges. Depression and anxiety became
unwelcome companions as I watched my financial security evaporate. My focus
narrowed to a desperate search for income as I submitted thousands of job
applications, enduring hundreds of interviews over a year and a half before
finally securing stable employment.

## The Aftermath

Today, my financial reality is stark:

<div class="flex">
{{% figure
    src="3.png"
    alt="Interactive Brokers account balance on March 27, 2025: $75"
    class="pr-1"
    /%}}
{{% figure
    src="4.png"
    alt="Checking account balance on March 27, 2025: $25"
    class="px-1"
    /%}}
{{% figure
    src="5.png"
    alt="Credit score as of March 27, 2025: 646"
    class="px-1"
    /%}}
{{% figure
    src="6.png"
    alt="Credit usage as of March 27, 2025: over 75% utilized"
    class="pl-1"
    /%}}
</div>

I have a job I'm grateful for, but my financial horizon has permanently shifted.
Retirement savings hover near zero. Home ownership in one of America's most
expensive cities feels like a fantasy. The once-viable path to early retirement
has vanished.

The jarring transition from financial abundance to scarcity has taught me how
quickly fortunes can change—and how fair-weather many relationships prove to be.
One day you're celebrated for your success; the next, your struggles become
inconvenient background noise to former admirers.

## The Unexpected Silver Lining

Here's the paradox that still puzzles me: I'm happier now than I was with
millions. My life has two dogs I adore, meaningful work, and a daily routine
that brings genuine satisfaction despite its modesty. The weight of constantly
managing wealth—and the fear of losing it—has lifted. Money amplified certain
aspects of my personality that weren't my best, and its absence has forced me to
reconnect with what truly matters.

## If I Could Do It All Again

When people ask what I'd do differently, I struggle to answer honestly. Each
decision made sense at the time with the information and emotional state I had.
I don't regret my generosity, though it contributed to my downfall. I don't
regret taking entrepreneurial risks, though they didn't pay off.

What I would change is my approach to risk management. I'd create financial
firewalls to protect a core of wealth from my own worst impulses. I'd recognize
that helping others requires first securing your own position. I'd accept that
market timing is a game where even professionals mostly fail.

And I'd remind myself that money is a terrible measuring stick for success or
worth.

## Moving Forward

Writing this has been cathartic. I'm not seeking sympathy or advice—just sharing
a cautionary tale that might help someone else avoid similar mistakes. The
weight of secret failure is heavier than public acknowledgment of one's
missteps.

It should be noted that I left many details out of this story, but I have to
save some content in case I ever write a book. And those additional details
don't change the essence of the story.

My silver lining is a substantial tax loss carryforward that will shelter future
gains, should I ever have any. More valuable is the perspective I've gained on
what constitutes a good life. It isn't the balance in your accounts but the
relationships you nurture, the meaningful work you do, and your capacity for
contentment regardless of circumstance.

You can always make more money. You cannot make more time. Use yours wisely.
