---
title: "Exercise as Meditation"
date: 2024-10-21T15:31:30-04:00
draft: false
tags:
- exercise
- meditation
- yoga
- mindfulness
- lifestyle
- habits
- mental health
- well-being
---

Yoga is a good example of exercise that is meditative. Or rather, it's the other
way around: yoga is more like meditation that is also good exercise. Or at the
very least, when we talk about yoga as exercise, we're usually referring to the
_āsanas_ (i.e., poses) and _vinyāsa_ style yoga (i.e., sequences of poses) that
are part of the practice. But yoga is much more than that. It's a philosophy, a
way of life, a spiritual practice. And it's all of these things at once.

This post isn't so much about yoga, but rather about other types of exercise
being similar meditative experiences. In my case at least, I don't think I
became fully aware of the connection between exercise and meditation until I
started learning yoga. Reflecting on past experiences, I know now why I always
really enjoyed long distance running and cycling, because they are very much
conducive to meditative experiences.

Exercise has a lot of wonderful benefits, and those benefits compound over time
and have long lasting effects, even after you stop exercising. Generally
speaking, however, regular and consistent exercise is better than sporadic and
inconsistent exercise, even if the intensity is lower. Regular exercise helps
you stay in shape, and exercise is more enjoyable when you're in good shape.

Unfortunately we live in a world that promotes laziness, inactivity, and
hedonism (i.e., overeating, overdrinking, and overindulging in general). While
there's no shortage of people singing the virtues of exercise and eating well,
in practice it's difficult to maintain a healthy lifestyle.

I think when you shift your mindset about exercise in general, and think of it
less as work and more as a sensing, feeling, mind-body experience, it becomes
easier to maintain. I look forward to my daily exercise routine, and I feel like
I'm missing something when I don't do it. I generally don't take rest days, but
I adjust intensity as needed based on how I'm feeling by listening to my body
and giving it a rest when it needs it.

I also generally prefer forms of exercise that you can do anywhere with minimal
gear. If you need a membership to a gym, or have to buy a bunch of expensive
equipment, or need to travel far and wide to find a good place to exercise,
you're less likely to stick with it.

Routines are key to maintaining mental and physical health, in addition to the
exercise and diet itself. Rather than thinking about exercise and meditation
(for example) as two separate activities, it's worth exploring how they can be
one in the same. Yoga is great, but it's hardly the only option.
