---
title: "Play the Metagame"
date: 2022-08-25T11:10:58-05:00
draft: false
tags:
- metagame
- career
- life
---

There are 2 ways to go through life: you can either play the game, or you can
play the metagame. The game is 1-dimensional chess, and the metagame is
N-dimensional chess.

You can apply this idea to just about everything in life. The easiest way to
move from playing the game to the metagame is to think about every interaction
in terms of incentives. Examining incentives is the easiest way to figure out
what people want and how to turn win/lose or lose/lose transactions into
win/win.

Playing the game is about following rules. Playing the metagame is about
figuring out how you can use the rules to your advantage. Playing the game is
when you rent out your time for income to survive, and the metagame is where you
find ways to generate income while you sleep.

In software engineering, the game is writing software. The metagame is creating
systems that write your software.

In marketing, it's said that no publicity is bad publicity. The game is trying
to market your product through traditional means (ads). The metagame is making
people do the advertising for you, perhaps by acting quirky on Twitter to amass
a following, or constructing scandals to generate attention for whatever it is
you're selling, or using so-called "growth hacks" like spamming your product on
various websites.

Whatever you say on the Internet will probably offend someone somewhere, but the
important thing is having your name in the news as much as possible (if that's
what you're trying to do). You may not like it, but that's how the world works.

People who go farthest in life are experts at the metagame. They've realized
that most of the self-help platitudes are written to benefit the person writing
them, not their target audience. In other words: everyone is selfish and acts
according to their own best interests at all times, and once you understand that
and act accordingly, you can start to use it to your advantage.
