---
title: "Passive vs. Active Philosophy"
date: 2024-02-24T09:52:25-05:00
draft: true
tags:
- philosophy
- advice
- fear
- failure
- laziness
- life
---

Speaking broadly, there are two ways to think about life: passively or actively. Passive philosophy amounts to _letting things happen_, whereas active is about _making things happen_.

I generally try to stay active. If I want something to happen, I need to make it
happen. Sitting around waiting for something to happen or for someone to come
along and tell you what to do is passive.

You can find plenty of examples of this in life, and you may also notice that
people who achieve their vision of success tend to be active. The belief that
the world owes you something and you shouldn't have to take an active role in
making things happen harms you and you alone. Actively working to pursue your
goals is the only sensible way to get through life.

Some people can get far in life passively, and–anecdotally speaking–they tend to
be people with relatively strong support networks. It could be that their
parents are very involved in their lives, or they have some other strong
influences, such as a spouse, close friend, or partner. These people would be
remarkably successful if they just took a more active role in their lives
(provided they wanted to).

I've contributed to many open-source software projects over the years and have
created a number myself. I've been asked by people before how they can "get into
open-source", and to me, this question is absurd: the only thing holding you
back is you. The cool thing about software is that it's soft, and the only limit
to what you can do is your time and energy. There are no open-source police out
there; you can publish as much or as little code as you want. There are infinite
resources on the Internet and elsewhere to learn about writing software.

It can be easy to fall into the passive trap. It's easy to be passive; being
active is hard. Being active is scary; it means that if you fail, you can only
blame yourself. You become fully responsible for your actions, and you have to
bail yourself out when things go wrong.

To me it has felt for a long time like there's been an uptick in the general
infantilization of everything, but it may just be that I'm growing older. You
see this often in the various media we're exposed to, especially advertising,
and the way politicians and anyone in positions of power speak down to people
like they're idiots. A lot of the modern-day political backlash seems to be a
response to this kind of infantilization and condescending patronizing.

Passivity is choosing to be infantilized, or in other words, it's choosing to
let someone else make your decisions. Being active is harder, but the result will always be better.
