---
title: "Growth vs. Grind"
date: 2024-03-22T12:14:32-04:00
draft: false
tags:
  - growth
  - grind
  - laziness
  - startups
---

It's worth discussing the difference between growth and grind mindsets. Growth
is the process of learning, improving, and evolving–ideally in an upward
trajectory. Conversely, grind is working hard, often to the point of exhaustion
or burnout. The former is aspirational; the latter is...something else. I think
most people are taught to grind rather than grow. I've [written about this
before in another post]({{< ref "laziness-is-a-virtue" >}}), but framed
differently. The grind mindset is ground into us when we enter the school system
and are subjected to homework, tests, grades, and other forms of performance
assessment. The grind mindset is further reinforced when we enter the workforce
and are expected to work long hours, often for a fraction of the value we
provide to the company's bottom line (unless you're lucky enough to wriggle your
way into the executive suite). We're taught to grind because that's what's good
for the economy. The harder you work, the more you'll be rewarded, and it's a
virtuous cycle of consumption and production. In the era of digital Thought
Leadership and wannabe "influencers", there's no shortage of idiots on the
Internet offering their own advice on how to get rich quickly, and more often
than not it involves some variation of how you just have to work _really really
really really_ hard and you'll be successful. The VCs are generally the worst
about this, and of course, they're the worst people to take advice from because
they want the opportunity to invest in people willing to work hard for peanuts
in exchange for the slight chance of insanely high returns. Most of the VC's
advice is probably decent on the surface, and I believe most of them want people
to succeed. Still, there's a perplexing conflict of interest where the VC's
success depends on you being less successful than you would be without them
(provided you could succeed without their money). If you really _do_ have a
great business, the absolute worst thing you can do is take VC money. However,
the truth about most wildly successful companies is that they don't work without
a big pile of cash, a broad and deep network of well-connected people, and an
absurd amount of good luck. It comes down to the "work smart, not hard" cliché.
When people tell you to work hard, this is generally bad advice, and they're
either trying to exploit you or repeating what they've been told. To be clear,
hard work isn't bad, but generally speaking, the only reward for hard work is
more work. So, if you're choosing to work hard with the expectation of some
future reward, you should prepare yourself to be disappointed. There will always
be exceptions where hard work is indeed rewarded, but these are exceptions, not
the rule. Professional athletes aren't successful because they work hard;
they're successful because they're talented, have won the genetic lottery, _and_
they work hard. And some are so talented they don't feel the need to work all
that hard. It's a simple matter of cause and effect. I have found that the
things I'm good at come easily and don't require much effort, but I've seen
other people struggle mightily with the same tasks despite working much harder
than I do. Focusing on the grind is always the wrong approach, and instead
(whatever your endeavors), you should focus on growth. However, it still takes
an immense amount of practice to become exceptionally good at any skill, but
it's helpful to benchmark yourself against your peers and know when to quit if
things aren't going well. Knowing when to stop is also a valuable skill. We
can't all be NBA players.
